Add validate API (#7390)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _api-reference/validate.md

---
layout: default
title: Validate Query
nav_order: 87
---

# Validate Query

> You can use the Validate Query API to validate a query without running it. The query can be sent as a path parameter or in the request body.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use the Validate Query API to validate a query without running it. The query can be sent as a path parameter or inside the request body.
```

Reviewer: Disagree. "in" is sufficient/accurate here. Also, how about "or included in the request body."

Author: included works for me.

## Path and HTTP methods

> The Validate Query API contains the following paths:

Author: ```suggestion
The Validate Query API contains the following paths:
```

```
GET <index>/_validate/query
```

## Path parameters

All path parameters are optional.

Parameter | Data type | Description
:--- | :--- | :---
`index` | String | The index to validate the query against. If you don't specify an index or multiple indexes as part of the URL (or want to override the URL value for an individual search), you can include it here. Examples include `"logs-*"` and `["my-store", "sample_data_ecommerce"]`.
`query` | Query object | The query using [Query DSL]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/).

## Query parameters

The following table lists the available query parameters. All query parameters are optional.

Parameter | Data type | Description
:--- | :--- | :---

> `all_shards` | Boolean | When `true`, validation is run against all shards instead of one shard per index. Default is `false`.

Author: ```suggestion
`all_shards` | Boolean | When `true`, validation is run against [all shards](#rewrite-and-all_shards) instead of one shard per index. Default is `false`.
```

> `all_shards` | Boolean | When `true`, validation is run against [all shards](#rewrite-and-all_shards) instead of one shard per index. Default is `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`all_shards` | Boolean | When `true`, validation is run against [all shards](#rewrite-and-all_shards) instead of against one shard per index. Default is `false`.
```

Reviewer: @Naarcha-AWS

`allow_no_indices` | Boolean | Whether to ignore wildcards that don’t match any indexes. Default is `true`.

> allow_partial_search_results | Boolean | Whether to return partial results if the request runs into an error or times out. Default is `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allow_partial_search_results | Boolean | Whether to return partial results if the request encounters an error or times out. Default is `true`.
```

`analyzer` | String | The analyzer to use in the query string. This should only be used with the `q` option.
`analyze_wildcard` | Boolean | Specifies whether to analyze wildcard and prefix queries. Default is `false`. 
`default_operator` | String | Indicates whether the default operator for a string query should be `AND` or `OR`. Default is `OR`.

> `df` | String | The default field in case a field prefix is not provided in the query string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`df` | String | The default field if a field prefix is not provided in the query string.
```

`expand_wildcards` | String | Specifies the type of index that wildcard expressions can match. Supports comma-separated values. Valid values are `all` (match any index), `open` (match open, non-hidden indexes), `closed` (match closed, non-hidden indexes), `hidden` (match hidden indexes), and `none` (deny wildcard expressions). Default is `open`.

> `explain` | Boolean | Whether to return details about how OpenSearch computed the document's score. Default is `false`.

Author: ```suggestion
`explain` | Boolean | Whether to return details about how OpenSearch computed the [document's score](#rewrite). Default is `false`.
```

`ignore_unavailable` |  Boolean | Specifies whether to include missing or closed indexes in the response and ignores unavailable shards during the search request. Default is `false`.

> `lenient` | Boolean | Specifies whether OpenSearch should ignore format-based query failures (for example, querying a text field for an integer). Default is `false`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`lenient` | Boolean | Specifies whether OpenSearch should ignore format-based query failures (for example, as a result of querying a text field for an integer). Default is `false`. 
```

> `rewrite` | Determines how OpenSearch rewrites and scores multi-term queries. Valid values are `constant_score`, `scoring_boolean`, `constant_score_boolean`, `top_terms_N`, `top_terms_boost_N`, and `top_terms_blended_freqs_N`. Default is `constant_score`.

Author: ```suggestion
`rewrite` | Determines how OpenSearch [rewrites](#rewrite) and scores multi-term queries. Valid values are `constant_score`, `scoring_boolean`, `constant_score_boolean`, `top_terms_N`, `top_terms_boost_N`, and `top_terms_blended_freqs_N`. Default is `constant_score`.
```

> `q` | String | Query in the Lucene query string syntax.

Reviewer: "A/the query in Lucene string syntax"?

Author: ```suggestion
`q` | String | A query in the Lucene string syntax.
```

## Example request

> The following example uses an index named `Hamlet`, created using the following `bulk` request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example request uses an index named `Hamlet` created using a `bulk` request:
```

```
PUT hamlet/_bulk?refresh
{"index":{"_id":1}}
{"user" : { "id": "hamlet" }, "@timestamp" : "2099-11-15T14:12:12", "message" : "To Search or Not To Search"}
{"index":{"_id":2}}
{"user" : { "id": "hamlet" }, "@timestamp" : "2099-11-15T14:12:13", "message" : "My dad says that I'm such a ham."}
```
{% include copy.html %}

> You can then use the Validate Query API to validate a query made against the index, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer: "a query made against the index" => "an index query"?

> You can then use the Validate Query API to validate a query made against the index, as shown in the following example:

Author: ```suggestion
You can then use the Validate Query API to validate an index query, as shown in the following example:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json
```

GET hamlet/_validate/query?q=user.id:hamlet
```
{% include copy.html %}

The query can also be sent as a request body, as shown in the following example:

```
GET hamlet/_validate/query
{
  "query" : {
    "bool" : {
      "must" : {
        "query_string" : {
          "query" : "*:*"
        }
      },
      "filter" : {
        "term" : { "user.id" : "hamlet" }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy.html %}

## Example responses

> Depending on the validity of the request query, OpenSearch responds that the query is true, as shown in the following example response where the `valid` parameter is shown as `true`:

Reviewer: Can we clarify/simplify here a bit? The second phrase isn't necessarily true in the context of the first. Do we mean something like "If the query passes validation, then the response indicates that the query is `true`, as shown in the following example response, where the `valid` parameter is `true`:"?

> Depending on the validity of the request query, OpenSearch responds that the query is true, as shown in the following example response where the `valid` parameter is shown as `true`:

Author: ```suggestion
If the query passes validation, then the response indicates that the query is `true`, as shown in the following example response, where the `valid` parameter is `true`:
```

```
{
  "_shards": {
    "total": 1,
    "successful": 1,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "valid": true
}
```

> If the query does not pass validation, OpenSearch responds that the query is false. The following example uses a request query that includes a dynamic mapping not configured in the `hamlet` index:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the query does not pass validation, then OpenSearch responds that the query is `false`. The following example request query includes a dynamic mapping not configured in the `hamlet` index:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json
```

GET hamlet/_validate/query
{
  "query": {
    "query_string": {
      "query": "@timestamp:foo",
      "lenient": false
    }
  }
}
```

OpenSearch responds with the following, where the `valid` parameter is `false`:

```
{
  "_shards": {
    "total": 1,
    "successful": 1,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "valid": false
}
```

Certain query parameters can also affect what is included in the response. The following examples show how the [Explain](#explain), [Rewrite](#rewrite), and [all_shards](#rewrite-and-all_shards) query options affect the response.

### Explain 

> The explain option returns information about the query failure in the explanations field, as shown in the following example response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `explain` option returns information about the query failure in the `explanations` field, as shown in the following example response:
```

> The `explain` option returns information about why the query inside the explanations response option failed, as shown in the following response example:

Reviewer: The sentence needs a bit of rewriting.

> The `explain` option returns information about why the query inside the explanations response option failed, as shown in the following response example:

Author: ```suggestion
The `explain` option returns information about why the query failed inside the `explanations` field, as shown in the following response example:
```

Author: @natebower: ?

Reviewer: How about "The `explain` option returns information about the query failure in the `explanations` field, as shown in the following example response:"?

```
{
  "valid" : false,
  "_shards" : {
    "total" : 1,
    "successful" : 1,
    "failed" : 0
  },
  "explanations" : [ {
    "index" : "_shakespeare",
    "valid" : false,
    "error" : "shakespeare/IAEc2nIXSSunQA_suI0MLw] QueryShardException[failed to create query:...failed to parse date field [foo]"
  } ]
}
```

### Rewrite

> When the query is valid, the explanation response option shows the string representation of the query. When `rewrite:` is set to `true`:, the explanation is more detailed showing the actual Lucene query that is executed.

Reviewer: Same here. This needs a bit of rewriting, and I suspect that certain terms should be in code font.

> When the query is valid, the explanation response option shows the string representation of the query. When `rewrite:` is set to `true`:, the explanation is more detailed showing the actual Lucene query that is executed.

Author: ```suggestion
When the `rewrite` option is set to `true` in the request, the `explanations` option shows the Lucene query that is executed as a string, as shown in the following response:
```

Author: @natebower: ?

Reviewer: @Naarcha-AWS Works for me!

```
{
   "valid": true,
   "_shards": {
      "total": 1,
      "successful": 1,
      "failed": 0
   },
   "explanations": [
      {
         "index": "",
         "valid": true,
         "explanation": "((user:hamlet^4.256753 play:hamlet^6.863601 play:romeo^2.8415773 plot:puck^3.4193945 plot:othello^3.8244398 ... )~4) -ConstantScore(_id:2) #(ConstantScore(_type:_doc))^0.0"
      }
   ]
}
```

### Rewrite and all_shards

> When both the `rewrite` and `all_shards` options are set to `true`, the Validate Query API responds with detailed information from all available shards as opposed to the default of one shard, as shown in the following response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When both the `rewrite` and `all_shards` options are set to `true`, the Validate Query API responds with detailed information from all available shards as opposed to only one shard (the default), as shown in the following response:
```

---
layout: default

> title: Validate Query

Author: ```suggestion
title: Validate query
```

> title: Validate query

Author: ```suggestion
title: Validate Query
```

nav_order: 87
---

> # Validate Query

Author: ```suggestion
# Validate query
```

> # Validate query

Author: ```suggestion
# Validate Query
```

> The Validate Query API checks if a large query will run without running the query. The query can be sent either as a path parameter or in the request body.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the Validate Query API to validate a query without running it. The query can be sent as a path parameter or in the request body.
```

> ## Paths and HTTP Methods

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Path and HTTP methods
```

> The Validate Query API contains the following paths:

Reviewer 2: Is this text necessary? The template doesn't have an intro sentence.

Author: It isn't. I'll delete this one.

```
GET <index>/_validate/query
```

## Path parameters

All path parameters are optional.

> Option | Type | Description

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Parameter | Data type | Description
```

:--- | :--- | :---
`index` | String | The index to validate the query against. If you don't specify an index or multiple indexes as part of the URL (or want to override the URL value for an individual search), you can include it here. Examples include `"logs-*"` and `["my-store", "sample_data_ecommerce"]`.
`query` | Query object | The query using [Query DSL]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/).

## Query parameters

> You can use the following options in the query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following table lists the available query parameters. All query parameters are optional.
```

> Parameter | Type | Description

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Parameter | Data type | Description
```

:--- | :--- | :---
`all_shards` | Boolean | When `true`, validation is run against all shards instead of one shard per index. Default is `false`.
`allow_no_indices` | Boolean | Whether to ignore wildcards that don’t match any indexes. Default is `true`.
allow_partial_search_results | Boolean | Whether to return partial results if the request runs into an error or times out. Default is `true`.

> `analyzer` | String | The analyzer to use in the query string. This should only be used with `q` option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`analyzer` | String | The analyzer to use in the query string. This should only be used with the `q` option.
```

`expand_wildcards` | String | Specifies the type of index that wildcard expressions can match. Supports comma-separated values. Valid values are `all` (match any index), `open` (match open, non-hidden indexes), `closed` (match closed, non-hidden indexes), `hidden` (match hidden indexes), and `none` (deny wildcard expressions). Default is `open`.
`explain` | Boolean | Whether to return details about how OpenSearch computed the document's score. Default is `false`.
`ignore_unavailable` |  Boolean | Specifies whether to include missing or closed indexes in the response and ignores unavailable shards during the search request. Default is `false`.
`lenient` | Boolean | Specifies whether OpenSearch should ignore format-based query failures (for example, querying a text field for an integer). Default is `false`. 
`rewrite` | Determines how OpenSearch rewrites and scores multi-term queries. Valid values are `constant_score`, `scoring_boolean`, `constant_score_boolean`, `top_terms_N`, `top_terms_boost_N`, and `top_terms_blended_freqs_N`. Default is `constant_score`.
`q` | String | Query in the Lucene query string syntax.

## Example request

> This example uses an index named `Hamlet`, created using the following `bulk` request:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example uses an index named `Hamlet`, created using the following `bulk` request:
```

```
PUT hamlet/_bulk?refresh
{"index":{"_id":1}}
{"user" : { "id": "hamlet" }, "@timestamp" : "2099-11-15T14:12:12", "message" : "To Search or Not To Search"}
{"index":{"_id":2}}
{"user" : { "id": "hamlet" }, "@timestamp" : "2099-11-15T14:12:13", "message" : "My dad says that I'm such a ham."}
```
{% include copy.html %}

> Then, you can use the Validate Query API to validate a query made against the index, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can then use the Validate Query API to validate a query made against the index, as shown in the following example:
```

```
GET hamlet/_validate/query?q=user.id:hamlet
```
{% include copy.html %}

The query can also be sent as a request body, as shown in the following example:

```
GET hamlet/_validate/query
{
  "query" : {
    "bool" : {
      "must" : {
        "query_string" : {
          "query" : "*:*"
        }
      },
      "filter" : {
        "term" : { "user.id" : "hamlet" }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy.html %}

## Example responses

Depending on the validity of the request query, OpenSearch responds that the query is true, as shown in the following example response where the `valid` parameter is shown as `true`:

```
{
  "_shards": {
    "total": 1,
    "successful": 1,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "valid": true
}
```

If the query does not pass validation, OpenSearch responds that the query is false. The following example uses a request query that includes a dynamic mapping not configured in the `hamlet` index:

```
GET hamlet/_validate/query
{
  "query": {
    "query_string": {
      "query": "@timestamp:foo",
      "lenient": false
    }
  }
}
```

> Which OpenSearch responds with the following, where the `valid` parameters is shown as `false`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OpenSearch responds with the following, where the `valid` parameter is shown as `false`:
```

```
{
  "_shards": {
    "total": 1,
    "successful": 1,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "valid": false
}
```

> Certain query parameters can also affect what OpenSearch shows in the response. The following examples show how the [Explain](#explain), [Rewrite](#rewrite), and [all_shards](#rewrite-and-all_shards) query options affect the response:

Reviewer 2: Can you move this below the H3 example heading? It seems odd to end the sentence with a colon and the example is split by an H3.

### Explain 

> The `explain` option gives information about why a query failed inside the explanations response option, as shown in the following response example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `explain` option returns information about why the query inside the explanations response option failed, as shown in the following response example:
```

```
{
  "valid" : false,
  "_shards" : {
    "total" : 1,
    "successful" : 1,
    "failed" : 0
  },
  "explanations" : [ {
    "index" : "_shakespeare",
    "valid" : false,
    "error" : "shakespeare/IAEc2nIXSSunQA_suI0MLw] QueryShardException[failed to create query:...failed to parse date field [foo]"
  } ]
}
```

### Rewrite

> When the query is valid, the explanation response option shows the string representation of the query. When `rewrite:` is set to `true`:, the explanation is more detailed showing the actual Lucene query that will be executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the query is valid, the explanation response option shows the string representation of the query. When `rewrite:` is set to `true`:, the explanation is more detailed showing the actual Lucene query that is executed.
```

```
{
   "valid": true,
   "_shards": {
      "total": 1,
      "successful": 1,
      "failed": 0
   },
   "explanations": [
      {
         "index": "",
         "valid": true,
         "explanation": "((user:hamlet^4.256753 play:hamlet^6.863601 play:romeo^2.8415773 plot:puck^3.4193945 plot:othello^3.8244398 ... )~4) -ConstantScore(_id:2) #(ConstantScore(_type:_doc))^0.0"
      }
   ]
}
```

### Rewrite and all_shards

> When both the `rewrite` and `all_shards` options are set to `true`, the Validate API responds with detailed information from all available shards as opposed to the default of one shard, as shown in the following response:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When both the `rewrite` and `all_shards` options are set to `true`, the Validate Query API responds with detailed information from all available shards as opposed to the default of one shard, as shown in the following response:
```
